International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 — 8887)

National Conference on Emerging Trends in Advanced Communication Technologies (NCETACT-2015)

Printed Text to Audio Converter using OCR

Kalyani Mangale
Department of
Electronics and

Telecommunication

Hemang!i Mhaske
Department of
Electronics and

Telecommunication

Engineering, Engineering,
Sinhgad Institute of Sinhgad Institute of
Technology and Technology and
Science, Science,
Narhe, Pune Narhe, Pune
ABSTRACT

For many blind users educational choices are made based on
which material can be accessed and which cannot. These people
are dependent solely on Braille books & audio recordings
provided by NGOs.The presented work will provide visually
impaired people, an opportunity to have an audio material of their
own choice of any printed material. The framework consists of
two parts. One is Optical Character Recognition (OCR) which
includes operations like grayscaling, thresholding, filtering,
thinning, segmentation, cropping, etc. on a character in the image
and other part is text to speech conversion using Microsoft’s API
which will convert the text into speech (audio).

Index Terms
Braille books, OCR, API

1, INTRODUCTION

OCR technology provides reproductive systems. It gives the
ability to convert images of characters in a font of machine
character that can be understood or recognized by a computer.
Thus images of characters in a font of machine are drawn from a
bitmap of the image reproduced by the scanner. This presented
work is completely based on concept of Image Processing
(IP).The OCR process involves several aspects such as
segmentation, feature extraction and classification. Image
Processing Toolbox for MATLAB provides a feature set that
extends the product's capabilities to develop new algorithms and
applications in the field of process and image analysis. Image
processing is an absolutely crucial area of work for those groups
and industries that are working in areas such as medical
diagnostics, astronomy, geophysics, environmental science, data
analysis in laboratories, industrial inspection, etc. Although not
originally developed for users who are visually impaired, Optical
Character Recognition (OCR) technology has become an aid for
inputting documents quickly by and for users with vision
impairments. A complete OCR system consists of a scanner, the
recognition component, and OCR software that interact with the
other components to store the computerized document in the
computer. The process of inputting the material into the computer
begins with the scanner taking a picture of the printed material.
Then, during the recognition process, the picture is analysed for
layout, fonts, text and graphics. Finally, the picture of the
document is converted into an electronic format that can be
edited with application software. In addition, technological
developments will see an increase in accuracy, including the
ability of these products to decipher even handwritten materials.

In general, OCR systems work as an external device with the
user's existing assistive technology. Once the picture is in
electronic format, it is accessed for reading and/or editing
through the user's Braille, speech or magnification technology.

Vivek Niwane
Department of
Electronics and

Telecommunication

Priyanka Wankhade
Department of
Electronics and

Telecommunication

Engineering, Engineering,
Sinhgad Institute of Sinhgad Institute of
Technology and Technology and
Science, Science,
Narhe, Pune Narhe, Pune

Since some products work better with certain speech or Braille
systems, therefore, it is important to note its compatibility with
the other products in the user's computer system. Some products,
however, have an adaptive device built in. These are referred to
as "stand-alone reading machines."

2, BACKGROUND

Machine replication of human functions, like reading, is an
ancient dream. However, over the last five decades, machine
reading has grown from a dream to reality. Optical character
recognition has become one of the most successful applications
of technology in the field of pattern recognition and artificial
intelligence. Many commercial systems for performing OCR
exist for a variety of applications, although the machines are still
not able to compete with human reading capabilities.

3. RELEVANCE

There are many documents in world which are not available in
computer comprehensible format i.e. computer cannot read them.
Computer vision and Robotics cannot be imagining without
OCR. It acts as Benefit to Blind Persons. OCR has enabled
scanned documents to become more than just image files, turning
into fully searchable documents with text content that is
recognized by computers. With the help of OCR, people no
longer need to manually retype important documents when
entering them into electronic databases. Instead, OCR extracts
relevant information and enters it automatically. The result is
accurate, efficient information processing in less time.

4, COMPONENTS OF OVERALL

SYSTEM
The goal of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is to classify
optical patterns (often contained in a digital image)
corresponding to alphanumeric or other characters. The process
of OCR involves several steps including segmentation, feature
extraction, and classification. Common setup is illustrated in
figurel.

Digital
Camera

Text to Speech R tte Feature
ecognition <<

Fig 1: Components of an OCR system

Printed

Text

 

27

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 — 8887)

National Conference on Emerging Trends in Advanced Communication Technologies (NCETACT-2015)

A. Scanning

Through the scanning process a digital image of the original
document is captured by the digital camera. In OCR optical
scanners are used, which generally consist of a transport
mechanism plus a sensing device that converts light intensity into
gray-levels. Printed documents usually consist of black print on a
white background. Hence, when performing OCR, it is common
practice to convert the multilevel image into a bi-level image of
black and white. Often this process, known as thresholding, is
performed on the scanner to save memory space and
computational effort. The thresholding process is important as the
results of the following recognition are totally dependent of the
quality of the bi-level image. A fixed threshold is used, where
gray-levels below this threshold is said to be black and levels
above are said to be white.

B. Segmentation

Segmentation is the isolation of characters or words. The
majority of optical character recognition algorithms segment the
words into isolated characters which are recognized individually.
Usually this segmentation is performed by isolating each
connected component that is each connected black area. This
technique is easy to implement, but problems occurs if characters
touch or if characters are fragmented and consist of several parts.
The main problems in segmentation may be divided into four

groups:

e Extraction of touching and fragmented characters.

e Distinguishing noise from text. Mistaking graphics or
geometry for text.

e Mistaking text for graphics or geometry.

C. Pre-processing

Pre-processing techniques are indigence on colours, grey level or
binary document images containing text and/or graphics. In
character recognition systems usually applications utilize grey or
binary images since processing the colour images is
computationally high and tedious task. Such type of images may
also contain non-uniform background and/or watermarks making
it difficult to extract the document text from the image without
performing some kind of pre-processing, therefore, the desired
result from pre-processing is a binary image comprising text
only. Thus, to achieve this, several steps are needed, such as
image enhancement techniques to remove noise or improve
contrast in the image, and thresholding to remove the background
containing any watermarks, scenes or noise, third, page
segmentation to isolate graphics from text, fourth, character
segmentation to separate characters from each other and, finally,
morphological processing to enhance the characters in cases
where thresholding and/or other pre-processing techniques
eroded parts of the characters or added pixels to them.

A. Gray Scaling

A grayscale or greyscale digital image is an image in which the
value of each pixel is a single sample, that is, it carries only
intensity information [1]. Grayscale images have many shades of
gray in between.

B. Thresholding

It is the process of creating a binary image, that is, the image
containing only black and white pixels. Separation of
Background and Foreground is a main feature in thresholding.

C. Filtering (Median)

Removal of noise is the crucial task performed by Filtering.
Median Filter is used generally to remove salt and pepper noise in
an Image.

 

D. Thinning
This module reduces the thickness of bold letters and remove
extra pixels which are not necessary.

Skeleton formation is performed by the process of thinning

 

Fig2: Original Fig3: Gray scale Fig4: Thresholding

-teerree eaeerre
eecercer.
eeceeree.
eeraeree.
euaegace:
ee.
tance ere.
te

eteneen: sessere.
a eeeerresre ete eeee? erectereeceerce ‘
tite ete teteeesenentseeereee.
erecccrceree cree.

‘ eee
Nee e eee eee a eccaenecee
-Qeerrreceaeee

derssieets Saecas taneereet ry af:
ore

teeseees. cecees. ee
sereceee reeeeee. Leeerree
seee leeeeere

Fig 6: Thinning of an Image

E. Feature Extraction

It is the most important module implemented in OCR system.
Feature extraction is a technique to extract the main features of a
character to recognize it properly with maximum accuracy. It
includes steps like cropping and scans lines. Feature extraction
process is followed by Recognition process. It Compares
character with the available templates. Result will be the output
of comparison. In MATLAB mat2cell command is used for the
extraction of image in form of a cell for correlating with the
saved templates.

F. Recognition

Recognition process Compare character with the available
templates. Result will be the output of comparison. Template
matching techniques are different from the others in that no
features are actually extracted. Instead the matrix containing the
image of the input character is directly matched with a set of
prototype characters representing each possible class. The
distance between the pattern and each prototype is computed, and
the class of the prototype giving the best matches assigned to the
pattern.

The technique is simple and easy to implement in hardware and
has been used in many commercial OCR machines. However,
this technique is sensitive to noise and style variations and has no
way of handling rotated characters.

28

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 — 8887)
National Conference on Emerging Trends in Advanced Communication Technologies (NCETACT-2015)

G. Text to Speech conversion 6 RESULTS
Using speech application program interface (SA PI) the given text

is converted into audio. The Speech Application Programming

Interface is an API developed by Microsoft to allow the use of 4 ea ied =

speech recognition and speech synthesis within Windows He Edt View Inset Tools id Window Hel 1 Fie Edt View bnset Took Destiop Window Hop 3 File Git View Inset Took Destiop ‘Window Hap 3
applications. To date, a number of versions of the API have been Veda b\N00Es EUR ID Gade AAOEs AOE * Dada g\Addes- 208°
released, which have shipped either as part of a Speech SDK, or

as part of the Windows OS itself. Applications that use SAPI = rR f ”

include Microsoft Office, Microsoft Agent and Microsoft Speech on . Theta Rey There are FOUR very
Server. RTANT won in IMPORTANT words in hte IMPORTANT won in te
5. OCR PERFORMANCE EVALUATION pane LOVE HONEST LOVE NEST

No standardized test sets exist for character recognition, and as | TRUTH and TRUTH and TRUTH and

the performance of an OCR system is highly dependent on the

quality of the input, this makes it difficult to evaluate and RESPECT. RESPECT, RESPECT,

compare different systems. Still, recognition rates are often given,

 

and usually presented as the percentage of characters correctly WITHOUT these inyour WITHOUT these tn your WITHOUT ces in your
classified. However, this does not say anything about the errors | Bes hin be vow have NOTH fe vou have NOTHING,
committed. Therefore in evaluation of OCR system, three Bec ' Sai J

different performance rates are investigated:

Recognition rate

The proportion of correctly classified characters Fig 7: Result of Grayscaling and Thresholding of an Image
Rejection rates

The proportion of characters which the system was unable to

: File Edit View Insert Tools Deskto Window Hel
recognize. : =

DSGMas sk | ARVO A-|A2\/0H\/af
Rejected characters can be flagged by the OCR-system, and are

. . original image image corrupted by salt amd rnoise
therefore easily retraceable for manual correction : 3 . = [oo il
“ae sae POUR pee rey .
IMPORTAML scores tee ive
Error rate Po
The proportion of characters erroneously classified. Misclassified RESPECT.

WITHOUT those
Veo

characters go by undetected by the system, and manual inspection cess OTH
of the recognized text is necessary to detect and correct these
errors. There is usually a trade-off between the different
recognition rates. A low error rate may lead to a higher rejection

rate and a lower recognition rate. Because of the time required to

Image restored by median filter

SUVE. HONESTY,

detect and correct OCR errors, the error rate is the most important TRUTH and
when evaluating whether an OCR system is cost-effective or not. donee

1. tat
Tos. yretdiose NOTHING.

The rejection rate is less critical. An example from barcode
reading may illustrate this. Here a rejection while reading a
barcoded price tag will only lead to rescanning of the code or
manual entry, while a miscoded price tag might result in the Fig 8: Result for Removal of Salt and Pepper Noise
customer being charged for the wrong amount. In the barcode

 

industry the error rates are therefore as low as one in a million |
labels, while a rejection rate of one in a hundred is acceptable. In QGa8|k|“- > OG S| h[Aview of this, itis apparent that it is not sufficient to look solely on

the recognition rates of a system. A correct recognition rate of RI
99% might imply an error rate of 1%. In the case of text
recognition on a printed page, which on average contains about
2000 characters, an error rate of 1% means 20 undetected errors

HM fFigue3 - © HI fFigue4 - 9 BM fFigues - 2

per page. In postal applications for mail sorting, where an address eee Fi Ee Vt Ins To Dest Win He 2 Fes Shiela ine cs
contains about 50 characters, an error rate of 1% implies an error OSG aS| BINA: ” OGas|r|z- * USMS RNa: *

on every other piece of mail.
Li

 

Fig 9: Result for Segmentation of characters

ag

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 — 8887)

National Conference on Emerging Trends in Advanced Communication Technologies (NCETACT-2015)

7. CONCLUSION

The project presents complete Optical Character Recognition
system followed by text to speech conversion. The basics of
image processing and MATLAB are taken into consideration.
Because of the computing constraints of handheld devices, study
is being kept limited to light-weight and computationally efficient
techniques. Various algorithms for optical character recognition
have been studied. Modules related to OCR are implemented
which determines the efficiency and accuracy of project.
Different text to speech conversion techniques and versions of
SAPI are taken into consideration. Among those SAPI 5 version
for text to speech implementation is preferred. The methods are
kept as simple as possible so that economic and operational
feasibility will be there.

8. REFERENCES

[1] Gonzalez Rafael .C “Digital Image Processing” Pearson
Education Second Edition, Upper Saddle River New Jersey,
USA, 2002

[2] Chapman Stephen .J “MATLAB programming for
Engineering” second edition, 2002

IJCA™ ; www.ijcaonline.org

[3] Forsyth David .A, Ponce Jean “Computer Vision-A Modem
Approach” Pearson Education, First Edition, Upper Saddle
River New Jersey, USA, 2003

[4] Sandeep Tiwari, Shivangi Mishra, Priyank Bhatia, Praveen
Km. Yadav, “Optical Character Recognition using
MATLAB” International Journal of Advanced Research
(2013), Volume 1, Issue 9, 757-767

[5] Oi-Mean Foong and Nurul Safwanah Bt Mohd Razali,
“Signage Recognition Framework for Visually Impaired
People”, In.proc.of International Conference on Computer
Communication and Management, Vol.5, 2011.

[6] Azadeh Nazemi and Iain Murray,“An open source reading
system for print disabilities”, International Conference on
Computing, E-Learning and Emerging Technology &
International Conference on Advances in Computer ,
Electrical and Electronic Engineering - Sydney, Australia,
(ISSN : 2091-1610 ) , Volume No : 12 Issue No: 2

30

